Add 'Getting started with ROS 2 tracing' post (#51)
micro-ROS/micro-ROS.github.io: _posts/2019-06-26-getting-started-with-ros2-tracing.md

---
title: Getting started with ROS 2 tracing
author: christophebedard
---

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Setup](#setup)
3. [Simple tracing example](#simple-tracing-example)
4. [Callback duration analysis](#callback-duration-analysis)
5. [Upcoming work](#upcoming-work)

## Introduction

> Tracing allows to record run-time data from a system, both for system data (e.g., when a process is being scheduled, or when I/O occurs) and for user-defined data with minimal overhead. This can help understand internal system behaviour, make sure that the system is deterministic, and make sure that it is not exceeding its resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Robotic systems can be hard to analyze and debug, and one big reason is that internal processing is always changing in response to sensory input. Therefore, the ability to continuously monitor and record data about the robotic software is important, to make sure it behaves deterministically and always stays within resource limits.

On modern systems, the operating system and other running software has a big influence on the exact execution of the software and therefore, we also need information about these aspects.

Tracing is a well-established method that allows to record run-time data, which is already well integrated with operating systems. For example, we can trace when a process is being scheduled, or when I/O occurs. Current tracing systems have minimal overhead and are very configurable to reduce overhead (and data size) even further.
```

Now we'll download all the necessary packages. First, create your workspace.

```bash
$ mkdir ~/ros2_ws
$ cd ros2_ws/
```

Then clone everything using the following `.repos` file. It includes the core ROS 2 packages with instrumented versions of `rcl` and `rclcpp`, as well as the tracing tools and tracing analysis repos.

```bash
$ wget https://gitlab.com/micro-ROS/ros_tracing/ros2_tracing/raw/master/all.repos
$ vcs import src < all.repos
```

Let's build everything and source!

```bash
$ colcon build --symlink-install --cmake-args " -DWITH_LTTNG=ON"
$ source ./install/local_setup.bash
```

## Simple tracing example

Let's try tracing with a simple ping-pong example.

The `tracetools_test` package contains two nodes we can use. The first node, `test_ping`, publishes messages on the `ping` topic and waits for a message on the `pong` topic before shutting down. The second node, `test_pong`, waits for a message on the `ping` topic, then sends a message on the `pong` topic and shuts down.

To trace these nodes, we can use the `example.launch.py` launch file in the `tracetools_launch` package.

```bash
$ ros2 launch tracetools_launch example.launch.py
```

> You should see a few output lines, and that's it. You can take a look at the trace's events using `babeltrace`.

Reviewer: Maybe we can include a screenshot from the output? Just to give the users some feedback.

Author: Good idea!

```bash
$ cd ~/.ros/tracing/

> $ babeltrace my-tracing-session/

Reviewer: Same here. It would be good to include a screenshot and explain the output a bit, so that people have an idea of what they're getting.

Author: Yep!

```
Callback instances:
  callback_object            timestamp duration intra_process
0  94850404855976  1561619515985939037    43956         False
1  94765731803936  1561619515986232518   601285         False
2  94850404496080  1561619515986534398   482982         False
```

This is simple, but it isn't really nice visually. We can use a Jupyter notebook to analyze the data and display the results.

## Callback duration analysis

Add the following line to the arguments of each of the two `Node` objects in your launch file, which should be under `ros2_ws/src/ros2/tracing/tracetools_launch/launch/`. It will stop the nodes from shutting down after 1 exchange.

```python
arguments=['do_more']
```

Delete the previous trace directory, and execute the launch file again. Let it run for some time (e.g. 10-20 seconds), then kill it with `Ctrl+C`.

To run an analysis that displays durations of callbacks over time, use [this Jupyter notebook](https://gitlab.com/micro-ROS/ros_tracing/tracetools_analysis/blob/master/tracetools_analysis/analysis/callback_duration.ipynb), which should be under `ros2_ws/src/tracetools_analysis/tracetools_analysis/analysis/`.

> A sample plot of the callback durations for the `/ping` subscription is shown below. We can see that the durations vary somewhat greatly.

Reviewer: "somewhat greatly"? ;-)

Author: I'll rephrase :grin:
